Revamp context guide (#4215)
phoenixframework/phoenix: guides/contexts.md

In Phoenix, contexts often encapsulate data access and data validation. They often talk to a database or APIs. Overall, think of them as boundaries to decouple and isolate our systems into manageable, independent parts. Let's use these ideas to build out our web application. Our goal is to build an ecommerce system where we can showcase products, allow users to add products to their cart, and complete their orders.

> How to read this guide: Using the context generators is a great way for beginners and intermediate Elixir programmers alike to get up and running quickly while thoughtfully designing their applications. This guide focuses on those readers. On the other hand, experienced developers may get more mileage from nuanced discussions around application design. For those readers, we include a frequently asked questions (FAQ) section at the end of the guide which brings different perspectives to some design decisions made throughout the guide. Beginners can safely skip the FAQ sections and return later when they're ready to dig deeper.

### Adding a Catalog Context

> An ecommerce platform has wide-reaching coupling across a codebase so it's important to think upfront about writing well-defined interfaces. With that in mind, our goal is to build a product catalog API that handles creating, updating, and deleting the products available in our system. We'll start off with the basic features of showcasing our products, but as we add cart features later, we'll see how starting with a solid foundation with isolated boundaries allows us to grow our application naturally as we add functionality.

Reviewer: It feels like the last sentence is either missing "and" or could be split into two sentences. :)

```suggestion
An ecommerce platform has wide-reaching coupling across a codebase so it's important to think upfront about writing well-defined interfaces. With that in mind, our goal is to build a product catalog API that handles creating, updating, and deleting the products available in our system. We'll start off with the basic features of showcasing our products, but as we add cart features later. We'll see how starting with a solid foundation with isolated boundaries allows us to grow our application naturally as we add functionality.
```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An ecommerce platform has wide-reaching coupling across a codebase so it's important to think upfront about writing well-defined interfaces. With that in mind, our goal is to build a product catalog API that handles creating, updating, and deleting the products available in our system. We'll start off with the basic features of showcasing our products, then as we add cart features we'll see how starting with a solid foundation with isolated boundaries allows us to grow our application naturally as we add functionality.
```

> Phoenix includes the `mix phx.gen.html`, `mix phx.gen.json`, `mix phx.gen.live`, and `mix phx.gen.context` generators that apply the ideas of isolating functionality in our applications into contexts. These generators are a great way to hit the ground running while Phoenix nudges you in the right direction to grow your application. Let's put these tools to use for our new product catalog context.

Reviewer: What do you think about mentioning `mix phx.gen.auth` somewhere in this guide? It may not be appropriate here, but I think José put together an awesome example of what a more in-depth context looks like.

> In order to run the context generators, we need to come up with a module name that groups the related functionality that we're building. In the [Ecto guide](ecto.html), we saw how we can use Changesets and Repos to validate and persist user schemas, but we didn't integrate this with our application at large. In fact, we didn't think about where a "user" in our application should live at all. Let's take a step back and think about the different parts of our system. We know that we'll have products to showcase on pages for sale, along with descriptions, pricing, etc. Along with selling products, we know we'll need to support carting, order checkout, and so on. While the products being purchased are related to the cart and checkout processes, showcasing a product and managing the *exhibition* of our products is distinctly different than tracking what a user has placed in their cart or how an order is placed. A `Catalog` context is a natural place for the management of our product details and the showcasing our those products we have for sale.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In order to run the context generators, we need to come up with a module name that groups the related functionality that we're building. In the [Ecto guide](ecto.html), we saw how we can use Changesets and Repos to validate and persist user schemas, but we didn't integrate this with our application at large. In fact, we didn't think about where a "user" in our application should live at all. Let's take a step back and think about the different parts of our system. We know that we'll have products to showcase on pages for sale, along with descriptions, pricing, etc. Along with selling products, we know we'll need to support carting, order checkout, and so on. While the products being purchased are related to the cart and checkout processes, showcasing a product and managing the *exhibition* of our products is distinctly different than tracking what a user has placed in their cart or how an order is placed. A `Catalog` context is a natural place for the management of our product details and the showcasing of those products we have for sale.
```

    resources "/products", ProductController

Remember to update your repository by running migrations:

    $ mix ecto.migrate
```

> Note: we are starting with the basics for modeling an ecommerce system. In practice, modeling such systems yields more complex relationships such as product variants, optional pricing, multiple currencies, etc. We'll keep things simple in this guide, but the foundations will give you a solid starting point to building such a complete system.

Phoenix generated the web files as expected in `lib/hello_web/`. We can also see our context files were generated inside a `lib/hello/catalog.ex` file and our product schema in the directory of the same name. Note the difference between `lib/hello` and `lib/hello_web`. We have a `Catalog` module to serve as the public API for product catalog functionality, as well as an `Catalog.Product` struct, which is an Ecto schema for casting and validating product data. Phoenix also provided web and context tests for us, which we'll look at later. For now, let's follow the instructions and add the route according to the console instructions, in `lib/hello_web/router.ex`:

> ```elixir

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```diff
```

  scope "/", HelloWeb do
    pipe_through :browser

    get "/", PageController, :index
+   resources "/products", ProductController
  end
```

With the new route in place, Phoenix reminds us to update our repo by running `mix ecto.migrate`, but first we need to make a few tweaks to the generated migration in `priv/repo/migrations/*_create_products.exs`:

> ```elixir

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```diff
```

  def change do
    create table(:products) do
      add :title, :string
      add :description, :string
-     add :price, :decimal
+     add :price, :decimal, precision: 15, scale: 6, null: false
-     add :views, :integer
+     add :views, :integer, default: 0, null: false

      timestamps()
    end
```

> We modified our price column to specific a precision of 15, scale of 6, along with a not-null constraint. This ensures we store currency with proper precision for any mathematical operations we may perform. Next, we added a default value and not-null constraint to our views count. With our changes in place, we're ready to migrate up our database. Let's do that now:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
We modified our price column to a specific precision of 15, scale of 6, along with a not-null constraint. This ensures we store currency with proper precision for any mathematical operations we may perform. Next, we added a default value and not-null constraint to our views count. With our changes in place, we're ready to migrate up our database. Let's do that now:
```

Reviewer 5: Or:
```suggestion
We modified our price column to specify a precision of 15, scale of 6, along with a not-null constraint. This ensures we store currency with proper precision for any mathematical operations we may perform. Next, we added a default value and not-null constraint to our views count. With our changes in place, we're ready to migrate up our database. Let's do that now:
```

> We modified our price column to a specific precision of 15, scale of 6, along with a not-null constraint. This ensures we store currency with proper precision for any mathematical operations we may perform. Next, we added a default value and not-null constraint to our views count. With our changes in place, we're ready to migrate up our database. Let's do that now:

Reviewer 2: Might also be worth linking to a blogpost or some external resource on why it's important to store money as decimal this way, or if the user should consider storing them as cents as integer. As a precaution.

+   |> Ecto.Changeset.put_assoc(:categories, categories)
  end

+ def list_categories_by_id(nil), do: []
+ def list_categories_by_id(category_ids) do
+   Repo.all(from c in Category, where: c.id in ^category_ids)
+ end
```

First, we added `Repo.preload` to preload our categories when we fetch a product. This will allow us to reference `product.categories` in our controllers, templates, and anywhere else we want to make use of category information. Next, we modified our `create_product` and `update_product` functions to call into our existing `change_product` function to produce a changeset. Within `change_product` we added a lookup to find all categories if the `"category_ids"` attribute is present. Then we preloaded categories and called `Ecto.Changeset.put_assoc` to place the fetched categories into the changeset. Finally, we implemented the `list_categories_by_id/1` function to query the categories matching the category IDs, or return an empty list if no `"category_ids"` attribute is present. Now our `create_product` and `update_product` functions receive a changeset with the category associations all ready to go once we attempt an insert or update against our repo.

> Next, let's expose our new feature to the web by adding the category input to our product form. To keep our form template tidy, let's write a new function to wrap up the details of rendering a category select input for our product. Open up your `ProductView` in lib/hello_web/views/product_view.ex`: and key this in:

Reviewer 6: A "`" is missing before "lib/hello_web/views/product_view.ex". It results in a bad formatted doc.

* creating priv/repo/migrations/20210205203128_create_carts.exs
* creating lib/hello/shopping_cart.ex
* injecting lib/hello/shopping_cart.ex
* creating test/hello/shopping_cart_test.exs
* injecting test/hello/shopping_cart_test.exs

Remember to update your repository by running migrations:

    $ mix ecto.migrate
```

We generated our new context `ShoppingCart`, with a new `ShoppingCart.Cart` schema to tie a user to their cart which holds cart items. We don't have real users yet, so for now our cart will be tracked by an anonymous user UUID that we'll add to our plug session in a moment. With our cart in place, let's generate our cart items:

```console
$ mix phx.gen.context ShoppingCart CartItem cart_items \
cart_id:references:carts product_id:references:products \
price_when_carted:decimal quantity:integer

You are generating into an existing context.
...
Would you like to proceed? [Yn] y
* creating lib/hello/shopping_cart/cart_item.ex
* creating priv/repo/migrations/20210205213410_create_cart_items.exs
* injecting lib/hello/shopping_cart.ex
* injecting test/hello/shopping_cart_test.exs

Remember to update your repository by running migrations:

    $ mix ecto.migrate

```

> We generated a new resource inside our `ShoppingCart` named `CartItem`. This schema and table will hold references to a cart and product, along with the price at the time we added the item to our cart, and the quantity the user wishes to purchase. Let's touch up the generated migration file in priv/repo/migrations/*_create_cart_items.ex`:

Reviewer 6: A "`" is missing before "priv/repo/migrations/*_create_cart_items.ex"

```elixir
    create table(:cart_items) do
-     add :price_when_carted, :decimal
+     add :price_when_carted, :decimal, precision: 15, scale: 6, null: false
      add :quantity, :integer
-     add :cart_id, references(:carts, on_delete: :delete_all)
+     add :product_id, references(:products, on_delete: :nothing)
-     add :cart_id, references(:carts, on_delete: :delete_all)

> +     add :product_id, references(:products, on_delete: :nothing)

Reviewer 6: It seems that this line are present two times (line 609 and 611)

With our routes in place, let's add the ability to add an item to our cart from the product show page. Create a new file at `lib/hello_web/cart_item_controller.ex` and key this in:

```elixir
defmodule HelloWeb.CartItemController do
  use HelloWeb, :controller

  alias Hello.{ShoppingCart, Catalog}

  def create(conn, %{"product_id" => product_id}) do
    product = Catalog.get_product!(product_id)

    case ShoppingCart.add_item_to_cart(conn.assigns.cart, product) do
      {:ok, _item} ->
        conn
        |> put_flash(:info, "Item added to your cart")
        |> redirect(to: Routes.cart_path(conn, :show))

      {:error, _changeset} ->
        conn
        |> put_flash(:error, "There was an error adding the item to your cart")
        |> redirect(to: Routes.cart_path(conn, :show))
    end
  end

  def delete(conn, %{"id" => product_id}) do
    {:ok, _cart} = ShoppingCart.remove_item_from_cart(conn.assigns.cart, product_id)
    redirect(conn, to: Routes.cart_path(conn, :show))
  end
end
```

> We defined a new `CartTimeController` with the create and update actions that we declared in our router. For `create`, we first lookup the product in the catalog with `Catalog.get_product!/1`, then we call a `ShoppingCart.add_item_to_cart/2` function which we'll implement in a moment. If successful, we redirect to the cart show page or show a flash error message. For delete, we'll implement another new function on our `ShoppingCart` context called `remove_item_from_cart` and then redirect back to the cart show page. We haven't implemented these two shopping cart functions yet, but notice how their names scream their intent: `add_item_to_cart` and `remove_item_from_cart` makes it obvious what we are accomplishing here. It also allows us to spec our our web layer and context APIs without thinking about all the implementation details at once.

Reviewer 7: s/CartTime/CartItem

With our new cart functions in place, we can now expose the "Add to cart" button on the product catalog show page. Open up your template in `lib/hello_web/templates/product/show.html.leex` and make the following changes:

> ```eex

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```diff
```

Create a new file at `lib/hello_web/controllers/cart_controller.ex` and key this in:

```elixir
defmodule HelloWeb.CartController do
  use HelloWeb, :controller

  alias Hello.ShoppingCart

  def show(conn, _params) do
    render(conn, "show.html", changeset: ShoppingCart.change_cart(conn.assigns.cart))
  end
end
```

We defined a new cart controller to handle the `get "/cart"` route. For showing a cart, we render a `"show.html"` template which we'll create in moment. We know we need to allow the cart items to be changed by quantity updates, so right away we know we'll need a cart changeset. Fortunately, the context generator included a `ShoppingChart.change_cart/1` function, which we'll use. We pass it our cart struct which is already in the connection assigns thanks to the `fetch_current_cart` plug we defined in the router.

Next, we can implement the view and template. Create a new view file at `lib/hello_web/views/cart_view.ex` with the following content:

```elixir
defmodule HelloWeb.CartView do
  use HelloWeb, :view

  alias Hello.ShoppingCart

  def currency_to_str(%Decimal{} = val), do: "$#{Decimal.round(val, 2)}"
end
```

> We created a view to render our `show.html` template and aliased our `ShoppingCart` context so it will be in scope for our template. We'll need to display the cart prices like product item price, cart total, etc, so we defined a `currency_to_str/1` which takes our decimal struct, rounds it properly for display, and prepends a USD dollar sign.

Reviewer 7: Should we reference where the Decimal struct comes from here?

Next we can create the template at `lib/hello_web/templates/cart/show.html.eex`:

> ```eex

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```html
```

  def change do
    create table(:orders) do
      add :user_uuid, :uuid
-     add :total_price, :decimal
+     add :total_price, :decimal, precision: 15, scale: 6, null: false

      timestamps()
    end
  end
```

Like we did previously, we gave appropriate precision and scale options for our decimal column which will allow us to store currency without precision loss. We also added a not-null constraint to enforce all orders to have a price.

The orders table alone doesn't hold much information, but we know we'll need to store information about all the items in the order. For that, we'll add additional struct for this context named `LineItem`. Run the following command:

```console
$ mix phx.gen.context Orders LineItem order_line_items \
price:decimal quantity:integer \
order_id:references:orders product_id:references:products

You are generating into an existing context.
Would you like to proceed? [Yn] y
* creating lib/hello/orders/line_item.ex
* creating priv/repo/migrations/20210209215050_create_order_line_items.exs
* injecting lib/hello/orders.ex
* injecting test/hello/orders_test.exs

Remember to update your repository by running migrations:

    $ mix ecto.migrate
```

> We used the `phx.gen.context` command to generate the `LineItem` Ecto schema and inject supporting functions into our orders context. Like before, let's modify the migration in `priv/repo/migrations/*_create_order_items.exs` and make the following decimal field changes:

Author: Thank you for the thorough review and hanging tight on this. Will merge soon and would love your copy edit PRs if you still have them ❤️❤️❤️

    with quantity and point-in-time product price information
  3. After successful order insert (and eventual payment), items must be pruned
    from the cart

From our requirements alone, we can start to see why a generic `create_order` function doesn't cut it. Let's implement this new function in `lib/hello/orders.ex`:

```elixir
  alias Hello.ShoppingCart
  alias Hello.Orders.LineItem

  def complete_order(%ShoppingCart.Cart{} = cart) do
    line_items =
      Enum.map(cart.items, fn item ->
        %{product_id: item.product_id, price: item.product.price, quantity: item.quantity}
      end)

    order =
      Ecto.Changeset.change(%Order{},
        user_uuid: cart.user_uuid,
        total_price: ShoppingCart.total_cart_price(cart),
        line_items: line_items
      )

    Ecto.Multi.new()
    |> Ecto.Multi.insert(:order, order)
    |> Ecto.Multi.run(:prune_cart, fn _repo, _changes ->
      ShoppingCart.prune_cart_items(cart)
    end)
    |> Repo.transaction()
    |> case do
      {:ok, %{order: order}} -> {:ok, order}
      {:error, name, value, _changes_so_far} -> {:error, {name, value}}
    end
  end
```

> We started by mapping the `%ShoppingCart.CartItem{}`'s in our shopping cart into a map of order line items structs. The job of order line item record is to capture the price of the product *at the time of purchase*, so we reference the product's price here. Next, we create a bare order changeset with `Ecto.Changeset.change/2` and associate our user UUID, set our total price calculation, and place our order line items in the changeset. With a fresh order changeset ready to be inserted, we can again make use of `Ecto.Multi` to execute our operations in a database transaction. We start by inserting the order, followed by a `run` operation. The `Ecto.Multi.run` function allows us to run any code in the function which must either succeed with an `{:ok, result}` or error, which halts and rolls back the transaction. Here, we simply can call into our shopping cart context and ask it to prune all items in a cart. Running the transaction will execute the multi as before and we return the result to the caller.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
We started by mapping the `%ShoppingCart.CartItem{}`'s in our shopping cart into a map of order line items structs. The job of order line item record is to capture the price of the product *at payment transaction time*, so we reference the product's price here. Next, we create a bare order changeset with `Ecto.Changeset.change/2` and associate our user UUID, set our total price calculation, and place our order line items in the changeset. With a fresh order changeset ready to be inserted, we can again make use of `Ecto.Multi` to execute our operations in a database transaction. We start by inserting the order, followed by a `run` operation. The `Ecto.Multi.run` function allows us to run any code in the function which must either succeed with `{:ok, result}` or error, which halts and rolls back the transaction. Here, we simply can call into our shopping cart context and ask it to prune all items in a cart. Running the transaction will execute the multi as before and we return the result to the caller.
```

To close out our order completion, we need to implement the `ShoppingCart.prune_cart_items/1` function in `lib/hello/shopping_cart.ex`:

```elixir
  def prune_cart_items(%Cart{} = cart) do
    {_, _} = Repo.delete_all(from(i in CartItem, where: i.cart_id == ^cart.id))
    {:ok, reload_cart(cart)}
  end
```

Our new function accepts the cart struct and issues a `Repo.delete_all` which accepts a query of all items for the provided cart. We return a success result by simply reloading the pruned cart to the caller. With our context complete, we now need to show the user their completed order. Head back to your order controller and modify the `show/2` action:

```elixir
  def show(conn, %{"id" => id}) do
-   order = Orders.get_order!(id)
+   order = Orders.get_order!(conn.assigns.current_uuid, id)
    render(conn, "show.html", order: order)
  end
```

We tweaked the show action to pass our `conn.assigns.current_uuid` to `get_order!` which authorizes orders to be viewable only by the owner of the order. Next, we can replace the order show template in `lib/hello_web/templates/orders/show.html.eex`:

> ```eex

Reviewer 4: Shouldn't it be html instead? The documentation specifies it [here](https://github.com/rubynho/phoenix/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#guides).
```suggestion
```html
```

<h1>Thank you for your order!</h1>

<ul>
  <li>
    <strong>User uuid:</strong>
    <%= @order.user_uuid %>
  </li>

  <%= for item <- @order.line_items do %>
    <li>
      <%= item.product.title %>
      (<%= item.quantity %>) - <%= HelloWeb.CartView.currency_to_str(item.price) %>
    </li>
  <% end %>

  <li>
    <strong>Total price:</strong>
    <%= HelloWeb.CartView.currency_to_str(@order.total_price) %>
  </li>

</ul>

<span><%= link "Back", to: Routes.cart_path(@conn, :show) %></span>
```

To show our completed order, we displayed the order's user, followed by the line item listing with product title, quantity, and the price we "transacted" when completing the order, along with the total price.

> Our last addition will be to add the "complete order" button to our cart page to allow completing an order. Add the following button to the botto of your cart show template in `lib/hello_web/templates/cart/show.html.eex`:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Our last addition will be to add the "complete order" button to our cart page to allow completing an order. Add the following button to the bottom of the cart show template in `lib/hello_web/templates/cart/show.html.eex`:
```

```eex
  <b>Total</b>: <%= currency_to_str(ShoppingCart.total_cart_price(@cart)) %>

+ <%= link "complete order", to: Routes.order_path(@conn, :create), method: :post %>
<% end %>
```

> We added a link with `method: :post` to send a POST request to our `OrderController.create` action. If we head back to our cart page at `http://localhost:4000/cart` and complete an order, we'll by greeted by our rendered template:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
We added a link with `method: :post` to send a POST request to our `OrderController.create` action. If we head back to our cart page at `http://localhost:4000/cart` and complete an order, we'll be greeted by our rendered template:
```

```
Thank you for your order!

User uuid: 08964c7c-908c-4a55-bcd3-9811ad8b0b9d
Metaprogramming Elixir (2) - $15.00
Total price: $30.00
```

> Nice work! We haven't added payments, but we can already see our how `ShoppingCart` and `Orders` context splitting is driving us towards maintainable solution. With our cart items separate from our order line items, we well equipped in the future to add payment transactions, cart price detection, and more.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Nice work! We haven't added payments, but we can already see how our `ShoppingCart` and `Orders` context splitting is driving us towards a maintainable solution. With our cart items separated from our order line items, we are well equipped in the future to add payment transactions, cart price detection, and more.
```

> Great work!

Reviewer 9: You have "Nice work!" already in the previous paragraph. :)

## FAQ

> 

Reviewer 8: This sections needs to either be updated or removed, as it references to the implementation of the now replaced CMS.
